Distributed Component Object Model
Next we will take a closer look at a
fairly new lateral movement technique
that exploits the Distributed
Component Object Model.
The Microsoft Component
Object Model (COM)
is a system for creating software
components that interact with each other
within or across processes.
Interaction with DCOM is performed
over RPC on TCP port 135,
and local administrator
access is required
to call the DCOM Service Control Manager
which is essentially an API.
DCOM objects related to Microsoft
Office allow lateral movement,
both through the use of Outlook
as well as PowerPoint.
Since this requires Microsoft Office
to be installed on the target computer,
this lateral movement technique is
best used against workstations.
However, in our case, we'll demonstrate this
attack against the dedicated
domain controller that already
has Office installed.
Specifically, we will leverage the
Excel.Application DCOM object.
For this example, we'll connect to the
Windows 10 client as the jeff_admin user,
a local admin on the remote machine.
To begin, we must first discover
the available methods
or sub-objects for this DCOM
object using PowerShell.
In this code, we first create an
instance of the object using PowerShell
and the CreateInstance method
of the System.Activator class.
As an argument to CreateInstance
we must provide its type
by using the
GetTypeFromProgID method,
specifying the program identifier, which
in this case is Excel.Application,
along with the IP address of
the remote workstation.
With this object instantiated we
can discover its available
methods and objects using
the Get-Member cmdlet.
The output contains many methods and
objects but we'll focus on the Run method,
which will allow us to execute a Visual
Basic for Applications macro remotely.
To use this, we’ll first create
an Excel document.
Then we’ll create a proof-of-concept
macro by selecting the VIEW ribbon,
and selecting Macros.
We’ll name the macro “mymacro”
In this simple proof of concept, we will
use a VBA macro that launches notepad.exe…
…and we’ll save the Excel file
in the legacy .xls format.
To execute the macro, we first
need to copy the Excel
document to the remote computer.
Since we must be a local
administrator to use DCOM,
we should also have access to the
remote filesystem through SMB.
We can use the Copy method of the .NET
System.IO.File class to copy the file.
To invoke it, we specify the source file,
destination file,
and a flag to indicate that
the destination file
should be overwritten if present.
Before we are able to execute
the Run method on the macro,
we must specify the Excel
document it is contained in.
This is done through the Open
method of the Workbooks object,
which is also available through DCOM as
shown in the list of methods and objects.
The Workbooks object is
created from the $com
COM handle we created earlier
to perform our enumeration.
We can call the Open method
directly with code like this:
However, this code results in an error
when interacting with the remote computer.
The reason for this is that
when Excel.Application
is instantiated through DCOM, it is
done with the SYSTEM account.
The SYSTEM account does
not have a profile,
which is used as part
of the opening process.
To fix this problem, we can
simply create the Desktop folder
under the appropriate directory,
which is enough to meet
the profile requirement.
We can create this directory with the
following PowerShell code:
With the profile folder for the
SYSTEM account created,
we can attempt to call the
Open method again,
which now should succeed
and open the Excel document.
Finally, we can call the Run method.
Let’s connect to the remote computer
to find out if it worked.
The code should have opened the Notepad
application as a background process,
executing in a high integrity context
on the remote machine.
Since Notepad is not very useful,
lets upgrade this attack to
launch a reverse shell instead.
Since we are using an Office document
we can simply reuse the Microsoft Word
client side code execution technique
that we covered in the
client side attacks module.
To do this, we’ll use msfvenom to create
a payload for an HTA attack,
since it contains the Base64 encoded
payload that can be used with PowerShell.
Notice that we use the IP address of
the Windows 10 client’s
second network interface,
so that the domain controller can
call back to our Netcat listener.
Next we copy the line starting wit
“powershell.exe -nop -w hidden -e”
followed by the Base64
encoded payload,
and use a simple Python script to split
the command into smaller chunks.
These smaller chunks will bypass the size
limit on literal strings in Excel macros.
Now lets update our Excel macro to
execute PowerShell instead of Notepad.
Before executing the macro, we’ll start a
Netcat listener on the Windows 10 client
to accept the reverse shell
from the domain controller.
While this attack requires access
to both TCP 135 for COM
and TCP 445 for SMB, this is a relatively
new vector for lateral movement
and may help avoid some network
or host-based detection systems.